feat: add docs for the checkpoint restart to the v0.71.2 (#583)
vegaprotocol/documentation: docs/node-operators/migration-guides/upgrade-to-0710.md

---
title: Upgrade to 0.71.0
sidebar_label: Upgrade to 0.71.0
---

> This guide describes the steps to upgrade to 0.71.0 using a checkpoint. See the [changelog for v0.71.0](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md#0710) for information about breaking changes and other details.

Reviewer: add `v` to the version.

## Assumptions for the guide
The instructions below are written for Debian-like Linux operating systems. 

The guide uses systemd commands(`systemctl` and `journalctl`) to control binaries in the set-up. If you are using something different, your system's commands may vary.

> This guide is specifically intended for those who are already running a validator node with version `v0.68.0` or higher.

Reviewer: maybe we can change this to `v0.70.2`? (to minimize questions)

  AutoCertDomain = "api.vega.example.com"
  CertificateFile = ""
  KeyFile = ""
  [Gateway.GraphQL]
    Enabled = true
    ComplexityLimit = 0
    Endpoint = "/graphql"
  [Gateway.REST]
    Enabled = true
    APMEnabled = true
  [Gateway.CORS]
    AllowedOrigins = ["*"]
    MaxAge = 7200
...
```

If the `api.vega.example.com` domain points to your data node, it will obtain the certificate from the Let's Encrypt.

:::note All the differences
To see all the differences, we recommend generating a new configuration and compare with your configuration on the node. The procedure is described [here](./upgrade-node.md#16-update-data-node-config)
:::

## The vegavisor configuration change.

You can still use the old binary for the vegavisor and skip preparing the new configuration, but We recommend upgrading and preparing a new configuration for the vegavisor.

:::node Documentation
To read documentation for the vegavisor config visit [the vegavisor documentation page](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/blob/develop/visor/visor-config.md)

The excample vegavisor config is:

```toml
maxNumberOfFirstConnectionRetries = 43200
maxNumberOfRestarts = 3
restartsDelaySeconds = 5

> stopDelaySeconds = 0

Reviewer: You can highlight this one as a new one, and tell that this is useful for Sentry Node.

Author: fixed

---
title: Upgrade to 0.71.2
sidebar_label: Upgrade to 0.71.2
---

> This guide describes the steps to upgrade to v0.71.2 using a checkpoint. See the [changelogs for v0.71.2](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md#0710) and [v0.71.2](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md#0711) for information about breaking changes and other details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide describes the steps to upgrade to v0.71.2 using a checkpoint. See the [changelogs for v0.71.0](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md#0710), [v0.71.1](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md#0711) and [v0.71.2](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md#0711) for information about breaking changes and other details.
```

### 3. Download new binaries
Download new binaries for the upgrade version from the [GitHub releases page ↗](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/releases) and unzip them. Save them in the `<VEGA-BIN>` and the `<VISOR-BIN>` you chose. 

The binaries you need: 
* Vega binary: Also includes Tendermint and data node as binary subcommands
* Visor binary: Optional for setting up Visor for protocol upgrades (See the docs listed in [the previous migration guide](./upgrade-node.md#7-read-the-visor-documentation) for information on Visor.

See example commands for downloading below. You may need to update the version number depending on the version of the binaries you need to update to:

```bash
# Download archives
wget https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/releases/download/v0.71.2/vega-linux-amd64.zip
wget https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/releases/download/v0.71.2/visor-linux-amd64.zip

# Unzip downloaded archives
unzip vega-linux-amd64.zip
unzip visor-linux-amd64.zip

mv vega <VEGA-BIN>
mv visor <VISOR-BIN>
```

:::note  Manual update for binaries when running Visor

> Visor cannot automatically restart (or upgrade) binaries because you are restarting the network with a `checkpoint`. Once you stop the Vega network, you must update the old binaries with the downloaded ones. You can find the binary path in the `<VEGAVISOR-HOME>/current/run-config.toml` file. Usually the path is `<VEGAVISOR-HOME>/current/vega`
> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Visor cannot automatically restart (or upgrade) binaries because this release requires restarting the network with a `checkpoint`. Once you stop the Vega network, you must update the old binaries with the downloaded ones. You can find the binary path in the `<VEGAVISOR-HOME>/current/run-config.toml` file. Usually the path is `<VEGAVISOR-HOME>/current/vega`
:::
```

  AutoCertDomain = "api.vega.example.com"
  CertificateFile = ""
  KeyFile = ""
  [Gateway.GraphQL]
    Enabled = true
    ComplexityLimit = 0
    Endpoint = "/graphql"
  [Gateway.REST]
    Enabled = true
    APMEnabled = true
  [Gateway.CORS]
    AllowedOrigins = ["*"]
    MaxAge = 7200
...
```

If the `api.vega.example.com` domain points to your data node, it will obtain the certificate from Let's Encrypt.

:::note Compare differences
To see all the differences, we recommend generating a new configuration and compare with your configuration on the node. The procedure is described [in step 16 of how to upgrade a node](./upgrade-node.md#16-update-data-node-config)
:::

### 11. Update Visor configuration

We have planned to practice the protocol upgrade from version `v0.70.X` to version v0.71.2. The upgrade procedure is standard for upgrades described on [the protocol upgrade page](../how-to/upgrade-network.md). However, there are some changes to the configuration for the data node and the vegavisor.

Please follow [the standard protocol upgrade documentation](../how-to/upgrade-network.md). This document has only key points and suggested changes for the vega setup.

> ## The data node configuration changes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Data node configuration changes
```

> ## The data node configuration changes

Author: yes, i have updated it

Below is an example certificate for the data node auto TLS:

```toml
[Gateway]
  Port = 443
  IP = "0.0.0.0"
  Level = "Info"
  Timeout = "5s"
  SubscriptionRetries = 3
  GraphQLPlaygroundEnabled = true
  MaxSubscriptionPerClient = 250
  HTTPSEnabled = true
  AutoCertDomain = "api.vega.example.com"
  CertificateFile = ""
  KeyFile = ""
  [Gateway.GraphQL]
    Enabled = true
    ComplexityLimit = 0
    Endpoint = "/graphql"
  [Gateway.REST]
    Enabled = true
    APMEnabled = true
  [Gateway.CORS]
    AllowedOrigins = ["*"]
    MaxAge = 7200
...
```

If the `api.vega.example.com` domain points to your data node, it will obtain the certificate from the Let's Encrypt.

:::note All the differences
To see all the differences, we recommend generating a new configuration and compare with your configuration on the node. The procedure is described [here](./upgrade-node.md#16-update-data-node-config)
:::

> ## The vegavisor configuration change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Visor configuration change
```

> ## The vegavisor configuration change.

Reviewer 2: Rather than being a separate section, shouldn't this be under the "upgrade visor configuration" step?

Author: yes, that was probably duplicated during the conflict resolving

> You can still use the old binary for the vegavisor and skip preparing the new configuration, but We recommend upgrading and preparing a new configuration for the vegavisor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can still use the old binary for Visor and skip preparing the new configuration, but it's recommended that you upgrade and prepare a new configuration for Visor.
```

:::node Documentation
To read documentation for the vegavisor config visit [the vegavisor documentation page](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/blob/develop/visor/visor-config.md)

> The excample vegavisor config is:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Example Visor config:
```

```toml
maxNumberOfFirstConnectionRetries = 43200
maxNumberOfRestarts = 3
restartsDelaySeconds = 5
stopDelaySeconds = 3 
stopSignalTimeoutSeconds = 15

[upgradeFolders]
  "vX.X.X" = "vX.X.X"

[autoInstall]
  enabled = true
  repositoryOwner = "vegaprotocol"
  repository = "vega"
  [autoInstall.asset]
    name = "vega-linux-amd64.zip"
    binaryName = "vega"
```

#### Important changes for the vegavisor config

- `stopDelaySeconds` - Number of seconds that Visor waits before it sends a termination signal (SIGTERM) to running processes that are ready for an upgrade. After the time has elapsed, Visor stops the running binaries (SIGTERM).

- `[autoInstall.asset]` - This section has been renamed from `[autoInstall.assets]` and it has been restructured.

:::note Setry node use case

> The `stopDelaySeconds` is a useful parameter for sentry nodes. Let's set it for a few seconds to allow the sentry node to forward all the data to other nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `stopDelaySeconds` is a useful parameter for sentry nodes. Set it for a few seconds to allow the sentry node to forward all the data to other nodes.
```

---
title: Upgrade to 0.71.0
sidebar_label: Upgrade to 0.71.0
---

This guide describes the steps to upgrade to v0.71.0 using a checkpoint. See the [changelog for v0.71.0](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md#0710) for information about breaking changes and other details.

## Assumptions for the guide
The instructions below are written for Debian-like Linux operating systems. 

The guide uses systemd commands(`systemctl` and `journalctl`) to control binaries in the set-up. If you are using something different, your system's commands may vary.

> This guide is specifically intended for those who are already running a validator node with version `v0.` or higher.

Reviewer 2: What version?

## Upgrade steps

### 1. Stop the network
At this point, validators need to choose and agree on the checkpoint that will be loaded into the network during the next restart, and stop the network as soon as everyone agrees on the selected checkpoint.

The reason to quickly stop the network is to avoid producing more checkpoints and missing transactions after the restart (the transactions executed between when the selected checkpoint is produced, and the network is stopped).

For testnet releases, the time requirement may be relaxed, but mainnet downtime must be limited as much as possible.

1. Stop the running node
    - Stop `Vega` and optionally `data node` if you are not running Visor: `sudo systemctl stop vega && sudo systemctl stop data-node`
    - Stop `vegavisor` if you are running your node with Visor: `sudo systemctl stop vegavisor`
2. Verify the node has been stopped:
    - Vega: `systemctl status vega`
    - Optionally data node: `systemctl status data-node`
    - Optionally Visor: `systemctl status vegavisor`

### 2. Create backup

```bash
mkdir -p <BACKUP-FOLDER>/v0.70.3/wallets;
mkdir -p <BACKUP-FOLDER>/v0.70.3/core-state;
mkdir -p <BACKUP-FOLDER>/v0.70.3/tm-state;

> 

Reviewer 2: In previous versions the backup folder had the **upgrade to** version in the file path - so I'm guessing these were just missed, but I think they should be 0.71.1?

*  **You might see some errors when running `pg_dump`. To learn if they can be safely ignored, see the [troubleshooting section in the official timescaledb docs ↗](https://docs.timescale.com/timescaledb/latest/how-to-guides/backup-and-restore/troubleshooting/).

### 3. Download new binaries
Download new binaries for the upgrade version from the [GitHub releases page ↗](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/releases) and unzip them. Save them in the `<VEGA-BIN>` and the `<VISOR-BIN>` you chose. 

The binaries you need: 
* Vega binary: Also includes Tendermint and data node as binary subcommands
* Visor binary: Optional for setting up Visor for protocol upgrades (See the docs listed in [the previous migration guide](./upgrade-node.md#7-read-the-visor-documentation) for information on Visor.

See example commands for downloading below. You may need to update the version number depending on the version of the binaries you need to update to:

```bash
# Download archives
wget https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/releases/download/v0.70.3/vega-linux-amd64.zip

> wget https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/releases/download/v0.70.3/visor-linux-amd64.zip

Reviewer 2: Update v. number?

1. Download genesis
2. Remove old genesis at `<TENDERMINT-HOME>/config/genesis.json`
3. Save new, downloaded genesis to `<TENDERMINT-HOME>/config/genesis.json`
4. Verify genesis - see example below

#### Example workflow
An example workflow for reviewing the genesis file may look like following:

```bash 
# Download genesis
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/vegaprotocol/networks/master/testnet2/genesis.json

# Move old genesis to a different location
cp <TENDERMINT-HOME>/config/genesis.json <TENDERMINT-HOME>/config/genesis.json.bk

# Copy genesis to its final location
cp ./genesis.json <TENDERMINT-HOME>/config/genesis.json

# Verify genesis
<VEGA-BIN> verify genesis <TENDERMINT-HOME>/config/genesis.json
```

### 7. Update Vega core config

There is no change required in the `vega core` config. If you have to prepare the `vega` config from scratch, use the instruction for [v0.68.2](./upgrade-to-0682.md#7-update-vega-core-config).

### 8. Update Tendermint config

There is no change required in the `tendermint` config. If you have to prepare the `tendermint` config from scratch, use the instruction for [v0.68.2](./upgrade-to-0682.md#8-update-tendermint-config).

> ### 9. Migrate tendermint data when using default home path
> 
> Vega has migrated from the tendermint to its fork, called the [CometBFT](https://cometbft.com). This change has been introduced in the previous version of the vega. If you are using the default home path for the Tendermint(`~/.tendermint`), we recommend migrating it to the default for the CometBFT(`~/.cometbft`). You can read more about the change and required steps in the [previous migration guide](./upgrade-to-0702.md#9-migrate-tendermint-data-when-using-default-home-path)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 9. Migrate Tendermint data when using default home path

Vega has migrated from Tendermint to its fork, called [CometBFT](https://cometbft.com). This change was introduced in the previous version of Vega. If you are using the default home path for Tendermint(`~/.tendermint`), we recommend migrating it to the default for the CometBFT(`~/.cometbft`). You can read more about the change and required steps in the [previous migration guide](./upgrade-to-0702.md#9-migrate-tendermint-data-when-using-default-home-path)
```

### 10. Update data node config

> #### The Gateway Port settings
> 
> We have merged the `GraphQL` and the `REST` APIs into a single port. Now you must define the `Port` and `IP` in the `[Gateway]` section instead of its child. Remove the `Port` and `IP` from the `[Gateway.GraphQL]` and `[Gateway.REST]` sections.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Gateway port settings

The GraphQL and REST APIs have been merged into a single port. As a result, you now must define the `Port` and `IP` in the `[Gateway]` section instead of its child. Remove the `Port` and `IP` from the `[Gateway.GraphQL]` and `[Gateway.REST]` sections.
```

```diff
  [Gateway]
+   Port = 443
+   IP = "0.0.0.0"
    [Gateway.GraphQL]
-     Port = 3008
-     IP = "0.0.0.0" 
      ...
    [Gateway.REST]
-     Port = 3008
-     IP = "0.0.0.0" 
      ...
```

> #### Enable the TLS on the data node API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Enable TLS on the data node API
```

> The data node can request the TLS certificate for you automatically. The only requirement is to use port 443 for the Gateway component and has this port open to the public internet. You can still use a custom port and some software like Apache or Nginx and proxy pass requests to the data node, but in this case, you are responsible for generating and renewing the certificate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The data node can request the TLS certificate for you automatically. The only requirement is to use port 443 for the Gateway component and have this port open to the public online. You can still use a custom port and software like Apache or Nginx and proxy pass requests to the data node, but in this case, you are responsible for generating and renewing the certificate.
```

Below is an example certificate for the data node auto TLS:

```toml
[Gateway]
  Port = 443
  IP = "0.0.0.0"
  Level = "Info"
  Timeout = "5s"
  SubscriptionRetries = 3
  GraphQLPlaygroundEnabled = true
  MaxSubscriptionPerClient = 250
  HTTPSEnabled = true
  AutoCertDomain = "api.vega.example.com"
  CertificateFile = ""
  KeyFile = ""
  [Gateway.GraphQL]
    Enabled = true
    ComplexityLimit = 0
    Endpoint = "/graphql"
  [Gateway.REST]
    Enabled = true
    APMEnabled = true
  [Gateway.CORS]
    AllowedOrigins = ["*"]
    MaxAge = 7200
...
```

> If the `api.vega.example.com` domain points to your data node, it will obtain the certificate from the Let's Encrypt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the `api.vega.example.com` domain points to your data node, it will obtain the certificate from Let's Encrypt.
```

> :::note All the differences
> To see all the differences, we recommend generating a new configuration and compare with your configuration on the node. The procedure is described [here](./upgrade-node.md#16-update-data-node-config)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:::note Compare differences
To see all the differences, we recommend generating a new configuration and compare with your configuration on the node. The procedure is described [in step 16](./upgrade-node.md#16-update-data-node-config)
```

:::

> ### 11. Update the vegavisor configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 11. Update Visor configuration
```

---
title: Upgrade to 0.71.0
sidebar_label: Upgrade to 0.71.0
---

> 

Reviewer 2: What's going on here, onwards? This is formatting for a new page - should it be a separate page or is this like a duplicate?
